It's always good to have self-sufficient
Feels like it's a lot longer than that, but good morning, Minister, and
everyone else who's come.
So just give an opportunity to introduce yourselves and opening
statement, and then from there we'll move to questions.
Obviously, first for sport and recreation, that second tranche of it will be with
the communities.
Yeah, good morning, Mr. Chair and committee.
Thank you for having us in front of you this morning as part of our scrutiny week.
Mark Mitchell and the Minister for Sport and Rec, and I'm going to
allow the leadership team to introduce
themselves to you.
Mack Lennon, Chief Executive for the Ministry for Culture and Heritage.
Morning, committee. Duane Paice, Chair of Sport New Zealand and High Performance
Sport NZ.
My name is Tracey Haupapa. I am the Interim Chair for Te Kahuroa Nui,
the Sports Integrity Commission.
And
sitting behind me we've got plenty of SMEs, including we've
got our Chief Executive of Sporting NZ, Roland Cassels, and also
our Chief Executive of our Integrity Commission, Rebecca Raul, with us
as well.
Welcome aboard.
Thank you.
I will try and keep my comments brief. I know it's your time.
But I have got some opening comments if you'd like me to-
Please. Yeah
So thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the opportunity to appear before the
committee today. I want to start by acknowledging the positive outcomes we've seen
across the sport and recreation sector.
This includes progress toward providing greater certainty for Eden Park as
part of the Auckland Deal, while also working towards a world-class permanent
home for Auckland Cricket. At the same time, we're seeing real benefits
for communities. Sport New Zealand's work to support initiatives that reduce
crime and youth offending is a strong example of how sport and recreation
can deliver meaningful social impact.
The Ministry, Sport New Zealand, and the Sport Integrity Commission each
play a central role in a strong and effective sport and recreation
system.
We have strengthened that system by moving the strategic policy function to the
Ministry for Culture and Heritage, clarifying roles and sharpening
focus across the system.
This enables Sport New Zealand to concentrate on what it does best,
delivering real outcomes on the ground in partnership with communities and
sporting organizations. That delivery focus is critical and it's
something I want to build on. I expect Sport New Zealand to lift
participation and outcomes through practical, on-the-ground delivery
alongside sector partners, community providers, and local
clubs. This includes operating efficiently, supporting coordinated
initiatives that reduce crime and youth offending, and advancing the National
Physical Activity and Sport Plan.
At the same time, they must provide balanced, objective advice, including
on governance matters, and work across government to support major events and
international engagement. In the high-performance space, the
expectation is clear. Continued success on the world
stage, alongside a strong and sustained focus on athlete
wellbeing.
Alongside this, the Sport Integrity Commission plays a critical role in maintaining
trust and confidence in the system.
I expect the commission to operate efficiently, drive uptake of the code
integrity in sport organizations in a practical way that minimizes
compliance burden. It must also continue strengthening its
complaints and resolutions functions, ensuring they remain timely,
transparent and fair as demand grows.
Overall, these expectations reflect a more focused system, clear in roles,
strong in delivery, and committed to integrity and public confidence.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Minister. Order of
questions that have come through. First one, Diana.
Oh, there we go. Hello.
Thank you. My question is
about the Sport Integrity Commission. I'm going straight into it.
If you want to leave that-
No, go.
You want to go in order? No, maybe we can go to Sport Integrity Commission.
I'm just interested in how-- I know that there's a cut in
funding for the year ahead. But I am interested to understand
how that will be balanced with the
current workload, given that some parties are waiting up to 15 months for a
result out of the commission. And what will be done to,
i.e., prevent more having to go to the commission,
and what will reduce that timeframe.
Because,
as we know, they take up an awful lot of time, but they're also
traumatic and challenging when they aren't dealt with in a timely manner.
So I'm just interested to understand what the framework will look like.
So can I just say that obviously through the media there's been some-
There's been some interest around timeliness of complaints
that are coming forward.
The Sports
Integrity Commission is actually doing a very good job in terms of uptake and
engagement with codes and sports.
They're increasing the amounts of codes and sports that are signing up, which is a
positive sign.
One of the real challenges they have with these investigations is natural justice,
because understandably, a lot of the complaints that come forward, the people wish
to remain anonymous, and that presents some real challenges for
how the investigations are conducted.
We've got very experienced investigators inside the commission,
and it's important that there's fairness and natural
justice applied to all parties that are involved.
On saying that, I've been very clear in terms of my expectations, is that there is
a sharp focus on how we can expedite and move those
investigations forward. But I'll turn to Tracey if she wanted to make
any further comments on that.
No, I think
supporting and agreeing with Minister Dana with regards to the
process around the investigations.
And remember, too, in many ways, we're a start-up and we're still new.
So making sure that the organization has the right systems and
levers, the right capacity and capability in place, has been critical to
us over this last period. We also, to the minister's point,
we're really clear that this is about the victims or the complainants
leading the process. We understand the concerns and issues with
regards to timeliness and length of time for the investigation.
On balance, we are comfortable with the approach that we're taking.
Having said that, at a recent board meeting, we have
discussed the idea of now, based on experience and knowledge,
setting some time frames around the investigation process.
We're working that through now.
And just a supplementary on that. Is there work being done with the national sports
organizations to ensure that their own
integrity processes and protocols, if you like, are
managing as much of this as possible so it doesn't get to a point where it has to
go to the Sport Integrity Commission?
Yeah.
Yeah, look, I think education is a big part of it, without a doubt.
But
as the chair stated, it's a start-up,
and so they're still out engaging with the various codes and the
sporting bodies.
There is a strong uptake. I'm sure that part of their role,
although they're a relatively small agency, so
my expectation is their focus should
be on the victims or the people that are bringing those issues forward.
Mm.
But of course, education will also sit right alongside that in terms of
making sure-- And actually, their own process will identify if there are issues
sitting inside codes-
Mm
... and sporting organizations, will allow them to be able to make
decisions through their own boards and their own administration in terms of how
they improve that.
Just a comment, if I might, and then perhaps go to Duane.
We have a strong working and strategic relationship with Sport
NZ and with key sporting organizations and entities.
That's growing as we go through the process.
We've been pleased to rely on those relationships for sector advice and
sporting advice as well.
I don't want to take up the whole committee's time.
I know they've got a lot of other questions, so thank you. Duane.
I will just add, and it is really important-
Hello. Nice to see you
... nice to see you, an important discussion.
As Tracey alluded to, we run a chairs hui
for the sports sector, and we work really closely with the Integrity
Commission, and they've been in on at least two occasions that I
am aware of,
where we're helping chairs and the NSOs understand what
it is, what part they can play,
and working through the challenges that they are facing
with this and understanding what it would mean for their particular
sport. So there's a close working relationship.
We recognize the importance of this.
Great. Thank you.
New question. Scott.
Thank you. And thank you, Minister.
Could you just confirm that the government's cutting
9.4 million over four years for the sport and recreation
programs?
Yeah, the government's making cuts right across government because
it's bloated. It's not affordable.
It's not a sustainable situation for us as a country.
So we are focused on making sure that
there are cuts are made, but they're done in a responsible way, and we trust our
chief executives to be able to work together to make sure that we deliver a
world-class modern public service that will provide the best
possible service
for our country.
And so,
what are the implications of these funding cuts to
sport and recreation, particularly for participation rates
for younger people,
particularly those in lower income?
We might think of
ethnic minorities, disabled people, rainbow communities, people living in
high deprivation areas,
and people experiencing challenges to their mental health.
What are the impacts of these funding cuts for
those people that we really do need to get into sport?
Well, I hope that this government's been very focused on pushing investment to the
front line.
So we're very focused on making sure that more people get access to sport and
recreation, whether it be kids from lower socioeconomic
backgrounds, and we've got a big program that we're rolling out, and I visited one
of those programs last week. It's been very successful.
Whether it be people with disabilities,
it doesn't matter. We want to be rolling out more services to more people
and engaging them in more sport and more recreation because
we all know and we'd all agree that that only has positive
outcomes.
And is the government aware that community
sports organizations have highlighted that increased
funding is necessary to grow participation?
Well, they can talk to their own models and their
own plan, but we've been very clear as a government, is that
we want to get laser focused on delivery, on making sure that
frontline services are supported and grow, that we're delivering
more, but that we're rightsizing our government to make sure that our public
service is efficient, it's sustainable, and it can continue to deliver
results to the frontline into the future.
So if more is going to be delivered with less, what sports performance
measures are
expected to be affected, if any, by these cuts?
Well, I haven't seen any. Well, Dane, did you want to-
I'm happy to add on that
... add on that?
Yeah, Dane. Yeah.
We certainly recognize the economic and commercial reality of what
we're facing currently, and we are certainly leaning into that.
One of the things into your question is that we've had the
benefit, in hindsight, of a 12-year strategy that
is looking for
system change and movement, and we are halfway through that now.
And what that is allowing us to do now, and it's targeting
the areas you talk about of high deprivation, disability.
We've had programs on women and girls because their involvement and
participation has been lower,
and we've had some success in lifting that and lifting the
broadcasting that sits behind women's sport.
Halfway through the strategy, and it is now allowing us
to look at the programs that we have been running in those areas
and seeing which ones
are having the greatest level of impact.
And it's not necessarily sacrificing others, but it's doubling down on the
ones that we know are having impact.
And so I'd like to think that as a result of that, the outcome longer term will be
better because we can identify which ones are providing
greatest impact for us.
And Sport New Zealand's doing a very good job of that.
Raelene and
Jim Ellis, who's been rolling out our program, trying to reach more youth and get
them engaged. They are
going through and they're looking and working out what's actually delivering,
what's achieving results and what's not, and what's achieving results will get
funding support.
Supplementary, Kushal.
Morena koutou ko Taimai. E tena ata.
Can you give us specifics on what programs are going to be cut
or modified , what's up for delivery, what will be there
instead, and talk about how this
reprioritization, what it actually looks like on the
ground in these vulnerable communities and for RSOs who are
delivering them, including
any shifts in FTEs or
reprioritization. Because
a new sports program might require a different set of capabilities and
skills for delivery. So can you give us real examples of what that's
going to look like?
Sure.
There will be no cuts to what we deliver in the sector.
We've committed to our partners on a four-year program, and that investment will
remain. What we are looking at to--
And we're not looking at future years.
I'll be very clear on that. We're looking at the next 12 months ahead of us in this
current budget,
that we are reviewing our own internal practices and our back
office and operational pieces of where we can get greater efficiencies.
So to your direct question, will we be cutting services to who
we invest in now? The answer is no, we won't be.
But you've talked about-- So the programs you're talking about altering and
reviewing need, et cetera, is that not going to happen in the next 18 months?
Can you, sorry, just repeat that?
You talked about how you will look into vulnerable communities and look at where
the need is and maybe alter programs.
Is that not happening in the next 18 months?
Um-
So all your existing programs will continue to be delivered?
All our existing programs will continue to be delivered.
So we're heading into the last,
from 2028 to '32 is the final three year,
I mean, sorry, third phase of the strategy.
Now is allowing us to look at those programs that are more effective
to start to make some decisions that are future looking.
In the next 12 months under the current budget, there'll be no reduction
in services that are provided or change to those.
Okay. So RSOs can be reassured?
And we have reassured them very recently of that exact thing.
Yeah, Kush, I was more talking about the $8 million fund that's going towards
reaching those
youth and young people.
That's something new that we're doing, and we're identifying the organizations on
the ground that are delivering and then funding them. Yeah.
New question, Maureen.
Thank you, Minister. It's a segue into my question, actually.
I was going to ask you about how you increase that
participation, and especially in those vulnerable communities.
But at a higher level, how do you work across the other
ministries in a practical, active way-
Yeah
... to get there? Like-
... Police-
Yeah, totally
... Justice-
Yeah
... MSD, maybe?
No, it's a really good question. Obviously I saw a real opportunity because
I'm Police Minister and taking on sport and rec of-- because we want our
agencies working much closer together, and that's really the whole philosophy
behind social investment, is whole of government working together
to make the biggest, most positive impact we can in people's lives.
And so I saw a real opportunity there.
Police already do a lot of work in this space, and they're already a good partner
with Sport NZ.
Mm-hmm.
But we've just reinforced that partnership and provided more funding so that we
can run more programs. And it's the community-based organizations that deliver
those because they understand their communities best, and they know how we can get
the best return on that investment.
So you are getting good buy-in from the other-
Very good buy-in. Yeah. The program that I visited last week was in
South Auckland. It was
two of the mentors and role models and trainers
inside that program were,
one had been an ex-Black Power gang member, the other had been ex-Mongrel mob.
They'd seen the error of their ways, and they're investing back into young people,
and because they got some street cred in the eyes of these young people,
they made a huge difference. And,
I got to spend an hour with them, and they were sitting there.
There was a look in the eye,
they were enjoying, absolutely loving the teamwork and the sports that they're
involved in. And those programs just have so much
upside to them. And that's what we really want to be doing.
Making our young people understand that and get them into a position where they've
got confidence and they understand that they can
take advantages of all the great opportunities our country has,
instead of making poor decisions and get themselves onto a fast
track into the youth justice system or the adult justice system.
Thank you.
I want to ask a supplementary as well.
A little extension of it maybe, but
I'm interested in these relationships and how it relates to actually delivering
sports across the entire country because we've got an incredibly long country, from
Invercargill to Kaitaia and further.
And you've got the big population centers here, you might even all know it's
further. But we've got these big population centers.
It's maybe a little easier in some respects to deliver sports there, but
we've got all these remote rural communities across the country.
So what is the strategy to try and-
So on this one, Raelene can come forward if she wants to talk in more detail on it,
but on this one, we've currently got five programs running and
they're from Northland
through to Bay of Plenty and the East Cape.
So,
it's identifying community providers and then working
with them to actually deliver the program.
And that will be in provincial towns, rural communities, it doesn't
matter.
Obviously, in urban and city centers as well.
Raelene, do you want to say anything or does that cover it ?
Do you want to come forward?
Absolutely.
Thank you. I think certainly the two that what minister's talked about is that,
in the youth justice space, especially as those programs are more broadly,
we have a regional sports trust network that sits right across the country, so they
represent all the different areas.
They also work very closely with regional sports.
So we've got national sports organizations working at a national level.
They all have a regional sport,
and those regional sports work into the RSTs.
So that's actually where they have people that are getting out into those broader
communities that might not be in the metro areas and getting the support that they
need, whether it's against the youth crime element or whether it's actually
delivering sport in those smaller communities.
Yeah. Cool.
Thank you. A question, a new question.
Moving to high performance,
given
the decrease of some of the areas of funding there,
we understand that it's not just athletes, individual performance, but
also the greater impact on the economy and
the national brand, Aotearoa, New Zealand.
Are you concerned that any decrease in funding on our high performance, not
just individuals, but our high performance teams as well, will have an
impact on that? Or has there been any thinking around that?
Well, I think that, I agree with you completely.
Sport is so important to us as a country and our identity, and
we do extremely well in our high-performance athletes.
When I was in India last year, I met with Prime
Minister Modi. He wanted to know how a country of five and a half billion people
could deliver the medals that we deliver, and he's really looking
at to see what we can do and try and replicate it in India, which
I take as a huge compliment to the work that Steve Chew and High Performance New
Zealand and Raelene and the board and Diane are doing.
Because a lot of these people have been high-performance athletes
themselves. We're not cutting funding to high-performance sport.
We're going to continue to deliver that program, and
we remain committed to that because we recognize the importance of it, and I'm
hopefully heading up to the Commonwealth Games for a couple of days next month to
go and support our athletes up there.
And it's important that we continue to do that.
Is there a risk with
a honed focus that we might see less representation at the likes of
the Olympics and Commonwealth Games?
Not at all. I think the program is in-- In fact, it's an outstanding
program.
We do really well when you consider that countries like Australia,
a big high-wage economy that throws lots of money at things.
When you think about how we do as a country, we're exceptional on the
world stage, and we remain committed to that, and
this government remains committed to making sure that we can continue to deliver
those results.
New question, Scott.
What advice did the minister receive that resulted in
the cut of 900,000 from the Integrity
Sport and
Recreation
Commission?
Well, the country cannot afford the size of the public service that we have.
So does the minister accept that the commission's operating with around 20%
less Crown funding than required to fully meet its statutory
objectives?
Sorry, can you repeat that question?
That the commission is operating with about 20% less
than-
What are you talking about? The-
... this Crown funding than is required.
Are you talking about the Integrity Commission?
Yes.
No, the Integrity Commission's, they're fine with the funding that they've got.
They're absolutely fine. That's-
Absolutely. Well, the Chair can speak to that, but what are you talking
about they need 20% Crown funding?
What are you referring to?
20% less Crown funding than required.
Oh, Crown funding. Crown funding. I thought you said crowd.
Well, we are aware that-
The crowd is now-
... a big part of the funding
...
but no. Sorry.
This is-
Yeah, I was wondering, what is he talking about?
No, I'll
let the Chair speak to that
The
Sports Integrity Commission has been working well within
budget. We have an ambitious program of work.
The purpose of the Sports Integrity Commission is to
enhance integrity within sports and across the sectors, which is important.
There is a financial risk
from the end of financial year June
2028. We have managed in this budget and
for the forecasted period to manage within the
arrangements that have been determined by budget.
That has involved us looking very closely at the way
in which we operate. For example, the types of meetings we have,
with whom and how.
So we've been really working hard on that matter.
From the out years, from June or July 2028,
that will be challenging. We have discussed this matter with the
ministry and also with the minister.
And we've got three years to work hard to determine
how we manage our way through that.
Let me also say that in the early stages right
now,
we have an increase in the interest with complaints
and investigations, and we would expect that.
We also have an expectation that over time, they will balance
out, and we are hoping that that might occur within our budget period.
So
are you going to be monitoring the impact of the funding cuts?
And I'm thinking in ways in which you might be thinking about
scaling back anti-doping sample collection
or raising the threshold for dispute resolution and
investigation services. Are you monitoring what is actually
happening in the integrity sport and recreation?
Yeah, we understand our core business, and we also
understand the role and responsibility that we have in terms of anti-doping.
To the extent that we can, our core business remains safe
and secure. What we're looking at doing is monitoring our
spend across other areas of the organization and business.
New question, Dana.
Thank you. I want to go back to high-performance sport, if that's all right,
please.
I'm interested to understand two things.
Firstly, the impact that the change in strategy to
the targeted investment strategy, which I think is to a podium finish as opposed
to a top eight finish or something like that,
will have in terms of the funding for national sports
organizations delivering high-performance programs. So that's the first part.
And maybe we'll go with that bit first, and then we'll deal with what comes
next. So what will the impact be?
Because it would be naive for me to think that all of a sudden we've magicked up a
whole lot more athletes that are going to be in podium potential.
Mm.
So just understanding how that will impact
those high-performance programs in sports.
Yeah.
Thank you for the question. And Krushna, I might just answer a little bit of yours
in passing related to that.
You asked, do we
think about and worry about the future? Absolutely, we do.
We are consistently thinking about what it means particularly beyond
2028.
Mm.
So our funding to our
athletes
and the NSOs in which we are partnering and invest in is
secure through till the end of LA. We will
then face some challenge. I'm just not shy away from
that. Cost of sport is going up. In recent times, the
cost of travel to attend sport, which has been
the
key
way in which our athletes can be recognized on the world stage, get
ranking points, perform, and show where they sit
based on how they then get selected.
So yes, we do worry about those things.
Dana, to your question, yes, we have
become more targeted on who we invest in.
And we don't shy away from that we invest in podium sports
and medal outcomes. But we also don't do that at the
sacrifice of other athletes and all athletes and their wellbeing.
So we now talk about our high-performance
system as coming in, through, and out.
We don't just worry about them when they are in the through stage, as that
whole of that athlete cycle. So
that takes more resources as well, but we certainly recognize that
the investment in the individual and the wellbeing of the individual as a
person
outside of sport in the years to come is part of our
responsibility. So we do have to be a bit more targeted, I'm not
shying away from that.
Yeah.
But we do it in a balanced way,
and also mindful of we will also need a really strong team for Brisbane
in 2032.
Well, that leads into my supplementary question-
Mm
... which is the next layer of athletes coming through that aren't at
podium potential, but that we need to inspire and support to get
to 2032.
How does the new investment strategy deal with
those athletes?
Similar in our discussions with the minister is that we
are looking forward into the out years and what that would mean.
For now, we can't lock that in place.
We work with our national sports organizations on their
pathway program. We're aware on who it is in their
pathways, and it's probably fair to say we've got a slight
reduction just organically in the number of athletes that are
on that
podium path.
Mm.
But we don't want it to be there. We obviously want it to be higher, and we want
Brisbane to be a home game. So-
We need to work through the current economic challenge,
being mindful of not impacting, or impacting as less as we
can, the pathway programs.
As I say, we're okay through to 2028,
but it's clearly on our mind.
Last question, Helen Haszard. A short one, please.
Yeah. I'm going to go back to the availability of things like
all-weather sports fields in my community.
I see this as an incredibly valuable
tool in preventing a lot of social harm.
And when I looked at the numbers that have been given in terms of cost
benefit, they seem remarkably low.
They seem out of date, actually, and it may be because a lot of this
prevents problems rather than it actually being really hard to
measure. So I wanted to know whether you were going to do
some work or looking at that kind of value of this,
particularly in a place like Mount Albert, where I've got
intensified housing. And we've actually got fights at the
moment on about community spaces like The Point Chev Bowling Club,
where community organizations are fighting each other-
Sure
... about this sort of space. So can you just tell me,
what's your plans in intensified areas, and what's your plans
in terms of the value of that kind of open
space, all-weather sports fields, community clubs?
Yeah. So I think that
really from Sport NZ's side of it, it's the question around data.
Are we collecting data in terms of the value that...
Is that what you're asking-
Yeah
... in terms of social cohesion and that type of stuff?
So I don't know. Ralina, are we sort of collecting any data, or do
we do any work around that?
Yes, we certainly do. We have significant data in
relation to that. I think just around facilities, there has been a piece of work
done in relation to national facilities strategy and actually understanding what a
good
spread of facilities, what it costs, investment, and that's a piece of work that
the government asked us to do over the last 12 months, and that's currently sitting
with the minister at the moment.
Okay. Thank you.
Yeah, and just speaking generally, I think that we'd all agree that
access to green spaces and
sports fields and things like that just naturally has a positive
outcome for the communities that they're in.
That's very unscientific, but sort of talking to the point that you
made, which is a good one.
Thank you very much. That concludes our time with the minister as sports minister.
Well, thanks everybody-
Thank you
... for attending this morning, and now this afternoon.
Minister, are the Warriors going to make the finals?
Of course they will.
Who's playing on Saturday?
Of course they will, boring.
The Cronulla.
Kenny.
More importantly, who's going to win the rugby on the weekend?
Yeah.
Yeah, thank you.
I was going to ask about the path. I'm excited, but I thought I'd just leave it.
Lucking their way.
All right. We're on
the next one. Yeah.
So-
Subtle.
All right. Well, shall we do just the introductions to our
Ethnic Communities Ministry officials,
and then open up for introductory comments, then we'll move to questions.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair. So again, it's great to be here
in front of the committee during scrutiny week.
This is so fundamentally important for our democracy.
My name is Mark Mitchell. I am the
Minister for Ethnic Communities, and
I'll allow my leadership team to introduce themselves.
Tena koutou, committee. Vanakam. My name's Prathima Namasivayam.
I'm the Acting Chief Executive at the Ministry for Ethnic Communities.
Great to be here.
Tena koutou, kia ora. Good morning.
I'm Belinda Chin, DCE for Strategic Engagement and Stakeholder Insights
for the Ministry for Ethnic Communities. Thank you for having us.
Thank you.
So
bearing in mind that I have tried to keep these comments very short, but do you
want me to make some opening comments, Chair?
Please.
Yeah. So thank you for the opportunity to appear before the committee today.
I'll keep the opening remarks brief.
It is a privilege to appear as Minister for Ethnic Communities.
I regularly meet with communities across the country, and their insights on both
the opportunities and challenges they face help shape my priorities.
The latest evidence shows that ethnic communities contribute 87 billion to the New
Zealand economy, up from 64 billion in 2021.
My continued priority is to ensure the contribution continues to grow by improving
visibility, strengthening connections with government, and addressing
barriers. This includes supporting ethnic services and workers through stronger
evidence and better cross-agency engagement.
New Zealand is at its best when people feel a sense of belonging, trust one
another, and can participate fully in society.
But those foundations are under pressure.
Most people across our communities want the same things: safety,
opportunity, stability, and a sense of belonging.
But global conflicts and rising tensions are being felt locally,
increasing anxiety and division, and contributing to racism,
antisemitism, and Islamophobia
In some cases, overseas conflicts are spilling over into tensions between
communities here at home. This is deeply concerning.
Social cohesion cannot be assumed.
It must be actively built and maintained.
That's why the ministry supports community-led initiatives like the Harmony Accord,
and will continue to support similar initiatives.
It is a shared responsibility across government, communities, and
individuals. Strong social cohesion and full participation
are essential to New Zealand's economic resilience, social stability,
and national security, not only for ethnic communities.
Foreign interference is not abstract.
It is affecting members of ethnic communities in New Zealand today.
It remains an ongoing priority to ensure communities are supported to recognize and
respond to these risks. Looking ahead, the ministry will continue to
strengthen community resilience through practical support and
collaboration across government.
This includes the upcoming launch of a comprehensive online hub for
individuals, community groups, and organizations, and ongoing work
with relevant public service agencies to ensure efforts are aligned and
coordinated.
Across my portfolios, I'm focused on ensuring that New Zealand
is prepared and resilient. A consistent focus is that response
systems must work for everyone, including the needs of
ethnic communities. The ministry plays a unique role in supporting better
system responses. I expect this work to continue, and with a
strong focus on impact and value. My continued focus
is clear. I expect that ethnic communities
are supported to contribute fully to New Zealand's economy, and that they are
safe and resilient in the face of growing pressures, and that we
actively strengthen the social cohesion that underpins a stable
and inclusive society. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Minister, and again
questions coming. First one, Lawrence.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so much for joining us, Minister. Congratulations.
Yeah, thank you. Good to see you.
And can I just check,
before I get into the numbers of if the communities
under vote internal affairs, my question to you, Minister, is what
is the minister doing to address the ongoing race-baiting,
particularly by politicians, in light of the
upcoming election?
And also in terms of the New Zealand India Free Trade Agreement.
Well, my focus isn't just on,
is on the entire country. Doesn't matter what part of society you come
from,
we work with everyone, we work across every community.
And really, I have to say that our focus has quite simply been on
social cohesion.
We live in a world now with, I think we'd all agree, you see
with the geopolitical instability, old alliances being challenged,
the amount of global conflict,
and when people, in my view, when people come to New Zealand to make their home-
Mm
... they want to be safe.
Mm.
And they don't want to be-- We don't want to import those conflicts into New
Zealand. So there's a large amount of work being done in that space.
Probably, the Harmony Accord, as I mentioned in my opening comment,
was a way of bringing both our Muslim and our Jewish leaders
together to say that we can agree to disagree on some issues.
There's nothing wrong with that. We live in an open democracy.
We should be able to do that. And we very carefully guard freedom of speech,
but we can do that in a respectful way.
And so that's been a big
focus of the ministry, being able to be a conduit and a platform to be able to
provide that sort of support and advice.
That hasn't really quite addressed my question, though.
My question is, what about in terms of the racial division,
and we've seen the latest response from, you mentioned the Harmony
Accord, from CNZ, and particularly from
the Ethnic Community Leadership Network and Abdul Razak around the
fact that politicians in a position of power has
exacerbated racism and race-baiting here in
Aotearoa, making what you have described worse.
So as the Minister for Ethnic Communities, what are some of your goals and
visions and how can you combat that?
Well, I think every politician
needs to hold themselves to account.
And every politician is responsible for what they say, and they can
be held to account, and that's the beauty of living in an open
democracy, where people are able to challenge each other and hold different views.
I will come out and I will publicly condemn
any
language or any behavior that we think is going to
put ethnic communities or anyone in New Zealand, any group in New Zealand,
feel threatened or feel frightened, because we do have communities
currently in New Zealand that feel exactly those things.
And just final question on this line, which is in the funding from
this year, because we've also heard from, for example, Auckland Transport,
that every time a politician use race-baiting
as a discourse perpetuate harm to our communities, they see an increase in
violent crimes towards bus drivers, towards
passengers, and et cetera. Is there any budget in this
year for ethnic communities that would at least address, or
track, or provide data to substantiate some of
the things we've been hearing from various other agencies?
Well, I would like-- So if that is what you're hearing, then it'd be useful for
that information to be brought forward.
Without a doubt, the ministry would be very interested in that.
It's a small ministry and so we've got to be very focused on what we're
doing. And going out and collecting data from Auckland
Transport-
Mm
... things like that,
might not necessarily fit within that.
However, on saying that, the ministry works very closely across agencies,
particularly with police. Did you want to comment on that, Tina?
I can add to what the minister's indicated. You're absolutely right.
Justice and safety, a lot of our communities talk about the
effects of racism and how that plays out on the
grassroots level.
Some of the committee members might recall that in 2024 we did Ethnic Evidence-
Mm-hmm
... which is the baseline report on ethnic communities' wellbeing in Aotearoa, New
Zealand. One of the pieces of work that we are intending to do in the
next six months is look at one of the domains in a much more greater detail, which
is on justice and safety.
Awesome.
Working really closely with the New Zealand Police, working very closely with the
Ministry of Justice to do some deep dives.
Which means that we will also, having heard your submission, very happy to talk to
Auckland Transport to understand what is playing out and be able to provide that
visibility.
Cool. Thank you.
New question, Jenny.
Minister.
Hey, Jenny.
Good to see you here.
Good to see you too.
The Ministry of Ethnic Communities published this report, which you've just spoken
about, Ethnic Evidence Report, in December of
2024 under your government.
It identified a lot of critical gaps in health, employment,
housing, as well as widespread discrimination
affecting employment, housing, and health access.
Minister, my question to you is, can you identify
specifically what issues raised in this report, which was a
really good report. We've never actually received this kind of data
before in New Zealand, documenting the things that our
ethnic communities are experiencing, over 1.1 million in our
country. But can you identify government
policies or funded programs since this report
was published in December of 2024, not just by your
ministry, but as a result of your advocacy as Minister of Ethnic
Communities for other agencies to implement,
given the issues that this report raises, which is a lot of issues.
And then what issues remain to be addressed?
Well, all the issues that you read in there will remain to be addressed because
they didn't happen overnight.
Mm.
They've happened over decades. And the good news is about that report
is that it starts to give us a roadmap and a focus on what can be achieved.
And
I agree with you that a lot of it is across government.
And that's a large piece of work, and I was talking before about social
investment, which is inherently our policy around
identifying as a country where we make the investment, particularly in people's
lives much earlier, and how they gain the
greatest benefit from that. So, the report will highlight a whole
lot of work that's got to be done across health, across justice,
and many of the initiatives that have been rolled out by this government.
And I could take it on notice, and I could get you a more detailed list
of initiatives that have been already committed to or rolled out
across government that would address the issues that have been highlighted
in that report.
There's been a lot of work done in that space, without a doubt.
I look forward to receiving that detailed report-
Yeah
... Minister.
Yeah.
Supplementary question.
New Zealand has the highest rate of mismatch
in terms of
qualifications between migrants. This is actually identified by the OECD.
So they come in really skilled, a lot of our migrants,
but they don't actually get to do the jobs or the
work relevant to the skills that they have.
What concrete actions has your government taken since you released this
report to address the discrimination in hiring and the
systematic under-recognition of overseas qualifications?
Yeah, so look, again, the questions that you're asking touch lots of
other ministries and agencies, and I'm not the minister and so I'm not
going to speak to what they're doing.
But again, if you give me your questions in the specific on notice, then I'll make
sure that you get a full response in terms of what has been achieved and
what has been delivered across government in relation to those issues.
In relation to that one there, that is clearly an immigration, sits with
immigration.
Mm-hmm.
And yes, I recognize the fact that there are often tensions between getting
highly qualified individuals back in their
country of origin that then have to go through a process to make sure that they
meet the standards required in New Zealand.
And it's important that you do that because it's important that people that
are going to people for services can be confident that
those standard has been met in terms of New Zealand standards.
But I recognize that
this is an issue,
but I can't speak to it because that's something that
I'd say is under immigration.
I realize that, but it is one of your roles as well to advocate on behalf-
Yeah
... of ethnic people-
Yes
... with your other colleagues.
Yes. No, absolutely.
Minister, I want to ask something you touched on in your opening statements around
foreign interference.
And I know that the Ministry of Ethnic Communities has a foreign interference work
program. We're hearing
repeatedly that this is probably the most dangerous geopolitical era in the last 80
years. And you mentioned that some of those international
challenges are seeping into New Zealand.
And only very recently, the SIS has publicly said that a foreign
military is using job sites like LinkedIn to extract sensitive information
from Kiwis. So I'm just interested in anything you can share with us publicly
about the work program that the Ministry of Ethnic Communities is doing to address
this rather challenging and complex situation that we find ourselves in.
Yeah, so I'll let Fatima and Belinda maybe speak to this as well.
Look, number one, it's education.
So people being aware-
Mm
... and being able to actually take steps themselves to try and
protect themselves against foreign interference.
And if they feel like they've been subjected to foreign interference, then
obviously bringing it forward and reporting it.
Mm.
But yes, we live in a world that's far more complicated now, and we're not
immune in New Zealand to
foreign interference. We do a lot of work through the Ethnic Communities
Ministry. We
bring communities together. We engage with all of the agencies.
We make sure all the agencies are available,
and speaking to them, and presenting to them in terms of what
they can do personally
around foreign interference and how to respond and where to go for help if
they feel like they've been subjected to it.
I can add to that.
Yeah.
We've talked to this committee about foreign interference for a couple of years.
What we have seen in the last year in particular is a real shift
in the way communities are approaching what is an incredibly sensitive
issue. Got 1.1 million people who belong to ethnic communities, but
foreign interference is not something all 1.1 million face.
There are groups of communities for whom this is a real threat, for whom this
is a really sensitive issue. One of the big pieces of work that we did
last year in June was that we had a conference called Ethnic
Advantage, where we talked about
headwinds facing Aotearoa, New Zealand.
And we talked about everything from health, we talked about skill
shortages, we talked about brain drain, but we also talked about
foreign interference. And we had
the chief executive of NZSIS sit on the table.
We had the Australian counterpart sit at that panel table and talked very
openly about foreign interference and the fact that foreign interference is not a
New Zealand only problem. It is a global problem that's-
Sure
... facing. And there's synergies between like-minded countries that we can learn
from, and they can learn from us as well in some of these areas.
And what that did was for many of our community leaders who
turned up to that event, it became business as usual.
This was not an issue that needed to be in the shadows.
We can talk about it openly. Community leaders, what are the skills and tools
that you need to be able to drive solutions for your
communities? And so it was a really rich discussion.
We have since the program has been established, released about
14 different tools, resources,
in 30 different languages for our communities.
One of the tools that I would, if I can shamelessly talk about this one tool, it is
a tool for our community leaders. So if you were a community
organization and you were worried about foreign interference, here is
modules. How do you do risk for your organization?
How do you do procurement for your organization?
So a modular tool that regional councils,
for example, can use to make sure that they can support their organization
withstand foreign interference.
It's very much about building a community's
resilience to respond to foreign interference
rather than looking for outside help, because the reality is that our communities
know more about foreign interference than public sector agencies will ever
find out.
Thank you, Raj. Just one supplementary on that, and thank you for that.
You did previously speak to our committee before about this
and mentioned that there's some real fear in our communities.
I'm just wondering if there's a message that you can send to our communities
about
New Zealand's perspective on this and our position
in terms of our sovereignty and
integrity.
Yeah, you first.
Sorry, I'm quite passionate about this area.
I think New Zealand is incredibly unique in the global stage in terms of
how we deal with foreign interference.
We talk about a social cohesion response to what is a
securitized issue. We were leading in the way we talk about it.
We talk about our communities being the first line of defense against
foreign interference. So we do not talk about vulnerable, at-risk
communities who don't belong in Aotearoa.
We talk about ethnic communities being the first line of defense that protect
all of us. The thing that we have found is that
a lot of our communities don't know where to go to report.
And the work program that we have done, because we have such strong networks
into our communities, are now a lot more aware of what the reporting
mechanisms look like for those communities.
But what is incredible is the resilience of community leaders who've
said, "Thank you for the tools. We know what's exactly happening in our
communities. We can have those culturally appropriate, nuanced
conversations about what it means to be safe in this country that
we call home." So I think from a very selfish, very
biased perspective, I think the work that we're doing is incredibly important, not
just for the country, but also for our region.
Yeah, and the leadership that Pratima and Belinda are providing, actually, across
government agencies to make sure that we're doing the best to protect
every new Kiwi
or immigrant that comes to our country.
I saw that globally, we just came out as recognized as the second safest
country in the world. We've got to keep working hard
to
stay there. But people come here to feel safe.
Mm-hmm.
And I take a very dim view of anyone that is doing
anything to make them feel unsafe.
And I think this government has shown very clearly that we will call out
foreign interference where we see it, where we find it, and we will prioritize
looking after our own people here in New Zealand.
Oh, brilliant. Thank you.
Yeah.
New question, Laura.
Mine was actually a sub.
Oh, sub. Okay.
Well, actually it was your question, but thank you so far for asking that.
I guess to supplement on that, you talked about some of the reporting mechanisms.
Do you think we have the reporting mechanisms right?
Because I do hear from many different diaspora communities
around not feeling safe to report to certain agencies.
Do you think we need to do a bit more work in that to make something a bit more
neutral or a different pathway into reporting?
And then I guess the other piece around the education,
giving community leaders tools, that's great.
What about the wider community and actually just wider
population and how we can educate our wider population
to interact with those communities on this issue? That'd be really useful.
That's a really excellent question.
One of the things that we find out when we engage with communities on foreign
interference, and we're not a security agency.
No.
We're a social sector agency.
Yeah.
But communities say to us as a social sector agency, "Can we see your
face? Can we know where you work? Can we come to your office to have
the meeting?"
Yeah.
"We don't want to tell you what our name is." You know, we'll
go into Teams meetings where people have shut off their screen because they don't
want to show. So this speaks to much more than we don't know
where the reporting is, but to trust and confidence.
Mm.
Some of the communities may have had reactions or
experiences about how they engage with public sector officials into
countries that they whakapapa to.
Yeah.
That doesn't stop when they move here, right?
So it is about trust and confidence.
So rather than thinking about whether the reporting
lines are correct, I think the problem is about addressing trust and
confidence-
Yeah
... that our communities have with public sector agencies.
I think if we can build on that, that will not only help with foreign
interference-
Mm
... but much wider things, justice, social sector, employment.
So that's probably where we are putting our effort into.
In terms of your second question, how do we
move beyond just working with the communities that are more likely to
experience foreign interference? That is an excellent question.
I think we're starting with where the impact is much more strongly.
We now need to move away from community leaders into communities
themselves.
Mm.
And that will take time.
Wider public, that will take even more time.
Some years ago, I talked about foreign interference being a behavioral
change for us as a country. If you think about smoking cessation, similar
principles apply. This is an ongoing journey,
and how we talk as a nation about foreign interference will evolve over
time. Our focus prioritized is currently with communities that are
most at risk.
Can I also add that the ministry runs two annual
conferences, and these conferences tend
to bring people from all walks of life.
So in one way, to engage the general public in some
conversations that might be trickier down the track is to get the
exposure and the awareness of who we are as New Zealanders in the
first place. And so we do quite a few different initiatives
in that regard when we're engaging with our communities and wider New
Zealanders. We do this through our ethnic exchange
economic growth conferences, as well as the ethnic
advantage, which tends to really look at social and
cultural issues that our ethnic communities may be facing.
Which of course also include all New Zealanders.
Which one, madam? Question.
Um.
Yeah, you as well, yeah.
Thank you. Um, Kia ora.
Hey, madam.
Yeah.
Um, I was, um,
really, um, encouraged when you talk about that first line of
defense.
Mm.
More encouraging than I think. And then you followed up with, "But we're not a
security, you know, setup."
Um, and I
acknowledge that. I think that's
quite a big thing to say in the context of what we're discussing.
Yeah.
Um,
and then,
it's a sub off Laura's question too actually, which is around the reporting piece.
So,
reporting and response in time.
So I'm thinking about those when you're talking with such
joy, nearly an enthusiasm, which is great when things are
going-
Mm
... okay and manageable.
Mm.
But when they go really bad-
Mm
... you should not have to be that security line, defense
space. So I
want to hear a little bit about how those things ...
Because not everybody will report.
Yeah. Yep.
You see, so it's the untold stories.
Mm.
And those, I think are to a real extreme, and particularly with
women.
Mm.
You know?
Yeah.
Because we will just deal with it ourselves generally.
So yeah, I'm interested to hear,
Minister, from you just in general, how you see that.
And it might be a little bit fuzzy but-
No, I think I understand what you're saying
... you know this, that it's sometimes those things-
Yeah
... they're hard to grasp and kind of really-
Yes
... understand and then decide or
I think I understand what you're saying. Stop me if I'm getting it wrong.
I think that it's almost linked back to Laura's question is that,
um, trust in institutions.
Mm.
Yeah.
And, um, a lot of people in particular coming from overseas, come from
countries where there's not high levels of trust-
Yeah
... in their institutions. And then we have groups within New Zealand that actually
have got low levels of trust in institutions as well.
Mm, mm.
Mm.
Um, I think that's where ethnic communities has got a really special role to play
because, um, they might be more likely to come forward and want to have a
discussion in a safe, what they deem is a safe space with ethnic communities
and our team than they may do with, um, New Zealand Police.
Um, although New Zealand Police are there ready to protect them and look after
them. So I think that, um, I think it's a really valid point, and to highlight
the fact that ethnic communities as a social agency, um, without a
doubt. But it has an important role in informing the
police on what the issues are that have been brought forward, um, you
know, from a security, um, perspective, so that we're able to understand and
protect those communities, um, better.
So, but there is a clear separation there-
Yeah. Mm
... um, without a doubt. Um, so is that sort of the issue that you were-
Yeah.
You were driving at?
Yes.
Yeah. So I just want to provide that assurance to you that there is a clear
separation.
Right.
Um, but there is also coordination in terms of
identifying what the threats are, what communities are
feeling vulnerable, um, and then working to be able to address
those and deal with them. Yeah.
Thank you.
Did you want to say anything?
Um, I can add if you'd like.
Mm-hmm.
We take a complementary approach.
Um, so for example, Belinda talked about us having a conference called
Ethnic Advantage, where we talked about headwinds and on foreign interference for
the first time. My call out was for the wahine in the room.
Mm.
Young people and women-
Yeah
... especially on national security issues, not just foreign interference,
have a strong role to play because they can generate
solutions.
Mm.
You know, they are looking at how do we build nations, right?
So the call out and you asked, but is it a message for our communities?
It is to the women and it is to the young people to step up in terms of national
security conversations.
Yeah.
Our role is complementary to the security agencies.
We look at building community resilience.
Yeah.
What are the pathways? What are your fears?
What are the tools and resources that you know you need to do?
When something gets to that pointed end- Trust and report,
and then we talk to the security agencies who are responding to the
reporting and what that looks like.
To be completely honest with you, our communities tell us, "Once we report, we're
not really sure what happens to it."
Mm.
Yeah.
But that is the nature of when you're investigating a national security
matter. You're not often able to come back and close the loop, so it's
about enabling and communicating that upfront and honestly with our
communities to say, "That's not a problem. That is okay.
That is what normal looks like, but please report."
Mm.
So it's that complementary approach.
What about the last supplementary, Lawrence?
Thank you.
You're on.
Thank you, Chair.
I appreciate what you're saying, and I think that element of foreign interference
is really important. But what you have specified is usually foreign interference
from the perspective of the community and potentially the culture that they
whakapapa to. What about foreign interference from other
countries that put their lives at harm?
For example, the US ICE-style immigration
tactics that are interfering with the way that we look at our immigration
system. I'm going to give you one specific example, which is Operation Indigo,
which is specifically targeting communities of color, and it's a joint operation
between the police and immigration.
So what is the Ministry of Ethnic Communities' role in addressing
foreign interference from other
powers that puts our communities at risk?
Yeah, I think, number one, Lawrence, we're not going to speak to another country's
immigration policy or anything like that. We'll talk to our own.
And-
It's foreign interference
... I think that
we've actually got a really
proud record in our country. We've got really good checks and
balances inside our democracy and our parliament.
And regardless of who's in government, we actually do a really good job, I
feel, at being welcoming, being inclusive, and investing heavily
into making sure that new immigrants and
ethnic communities and faith groups
are made to feel safe here. And I think that fundamentally is at the
core of the work that we do,
certainly with ethnic communities. But Ratima, are you happy?
Do you want to comment on that?
Yeah.
Foreign interference. I'm going to be a bit geeky and read you the
definition because that's really important, right?
What foreign interference is and what foreign interference isn't.
Yeah.
Foreign interference is an act by a foreign state
acting through a proxy intended to influence, disrupt, subvert New
Zealand's national interests by deceptive, corruptive, or coercive
means. So when I'm talking about foreign interference that the Ministry of Ethnic
Communities is working on, we're talking about the foreign state.
We're not talking about raruraru between community leaders.
That's not what this is. It is about foreign state.
What we are interested in is what communities experience on the
ground. So on a day-to-day practice, what
are communities feeling, rather than who is doing it.
That's not the space that the ministry works in.
We are simply looking at
why do you feel unsafe?
What do you need as support systems for you to be able
to feel safe?
What is it that you need to ensure that your communities have
the skills, the confidence to be able to engage in some of these
things, but also with public sector organizations?
So our conversations with our people are very
tangible, practical, on the ground, rather than in relation
to specific operations.
Well, thank you very much, Minister, all of you. Much appreciated.
It's been a very interesting discussion.
Yeah, thank you.
Very much appreciate you being here this morning-
Thank you, Chair ... with the Ethics Committee.
Thank you very much.
Yeah, good to see you. Cheers, guys.